fft.md, before:

# Fourier transform

Discrete Fourier transform:
$$
X(k)=\sum_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)e^{{-j2 \pi nk}\over{N}} \xrightarrow{\tiny{exp(-j2\pi/N)=W_N}}\sum_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)W^{nk}_N
$$

***

## 2-pass decomposition

- With $N=N_1N_2$
  - Fold $n$ into $(n_1,n_2)$ where $n=n_1+N_1n_2$
  - Fold $k$ into $(k_2,k_1)$ where $k=k_2+N_2 k_1$ (dimension reversed/transposed)
- Fourier transform $X(k)=\Sigma_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)W^{nk}_N$ becomes

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(k_2+N_2 k_1) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}x(n_1 + N_1 n_2)W_{N_1 N_2}^{(n_1+N_1n_2)(k_2+N_2k_1)} \\
&= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} \bcancel{W^{n_2 k_1}_{1}}\underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{..}e^{j 2 \pi N}=1}}{} \\
&= \underbrace{\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{\vphantom{\sum_{n_2}}W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2}}_{\text{Twiddle}}
  \biggl(
    \underbrace{
      \sum_{n_2}x(\dotsb)W^{n_2 k_2
    }_{N_2}}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_2}}
  \biggr)
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_1}}
\end{aligned}
$$

- Algorithm
  1. Perform FFTs along the high dimension $\bold{D_2}$
  2. Pointwise multiply by twiddle factor $W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2}$
  3. Perform FFTs along the low dimension $\bold{D_1}$
  4. Read the resulting data transposed

***

## 3-pass decomposition

- With $N=N_1N_2N_3$
  - Fold $n$ into $(n_1,n_2,n_3)$ where $n=n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3$
  - Fold $k$ into $(k_3,k_2,k_1)$ where $k=k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1$ (dimension reversed/transposed)
- Fourier transform becomes:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3)W_{N_1N_2N_3}^{(n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3)(k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1)} \\
&= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_2 N_3)}}}{} \\
%% &= \sum_{n_1} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3} \biggl[ \sum_{n_2} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \biggl( \sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} \biggr) W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} \biggr] W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} \\
&= \underbrace{
\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_3 N_2)} }_{\text{Twiddle(!)}}
\biggl[
\underbrace{
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
  \underbrace{
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} }_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_3}} \vphantom{\Text{()}}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} }_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_2}}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}
}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_1}}\\
\end{aligned}
$$
> (!) Note: outermost twiddle factor has it's index **transposed/bit-reversed**

- Recursive tree structure revealed:
  - FFT for $N_1 N_2 N_3$ array requires 2-pass FFT for $N_1$-by-$N_3 N_2$ pseudo matrix
  - FFT for $N_1$-batched $N_3 N_2$ array in turn requires *another 2-pass FFT* for $N_2$-by-$N_3$ pseudo matrix
  - 3 leaf nodes corresponding to FFTs of 3 different radices, 2 parent nodes corresponding to 2 twiddle multiplication

```txt
  N1xN2xN3 .______ N1
            \_____ N2xN3 .____ N2
                          \___ N3
```

***

## Tree decomposition
- Example input: 256-point signal
- Decompose into 4-pass radix-4 FFTs
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_4}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_3 N_4}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_3}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_2 (N_4 N_3)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_2}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_1 (N_4 N_3 N_2)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_1}$
   - Read the data transposed
```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 4  (N1)
                     \___ 64 (N2xN3xN4) .____ 4  (N2)
                                         \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3)
                                                          \___ 4 (N4)
```
<!-- - For $i$ in $1:4$:
  - Perform radix-4 FFT along ${N_{4-i+1}}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{\prod_{j=4-i+1}^{4}{N_j}} \text{ if } i>1$ -->
<!-- Question
- How to make tree traversal deepest child node first? -->

- Alternative Method - Decompose into pseudo-2D 16x16 matrix
   - Perform 2-pass radix-4 FFTs along $\bold{D_{N_3 N_4}}$ pseudo-dimension; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_3 N_4}$
   - Pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{(N_1 N_2)(N_4 N_3)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform 2-pass radix-4 FFTs along $\bold{D_{N_1 N_2}}$ pseudo-dimension; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_1 N_2}$
   - Read the data transposed
```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 16 (N1xN2) .____ 4 (N1)
                    |                 \___ 4 (N2)
                    |
                     \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3)
                                      \___ 4 (N4)
```
> (!) Note: again, indicates that twiddle factor has it's index **transposed/bit-reversed**

***

## Progressive transposition (Stockham algorithm)

- Instead of transposing all dimensions at once in the end, transpose one at a time as we do the butterfly
- Improve performance since reads from LDS are always coalesced (see: Geometric View of Stockham Algorithm)
<!-- - TODO: Example
  - Before: FFT pass 0 -> LDS exchange -> FFT pass 1 -> WB+T
  - Now:    FFT -> WB -> FFT -> WB+T -->

```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 16 (N1xN2) .____ 4 (N1) ____* 16 (N2xN1) ____* 256 (N4xN3xN2xN1)
                    |                 \___ 4 (N2) ___/                 |
                    |                                                  |
                     \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3) ____* 16 (N4xN3) ___/
                                      \___ 4 (N4) ___/
```

***


## Decimation-in-freqeuncy (DIF) form:
- DIF form is derived by factoring twiddle factor the different way:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(\dotsb) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_2 N_3)}}}{} \\
&= \sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_3 N_2)} }_{\text{Twiddle}}
\biggl[
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}
\hphantom{.....}\text{(decimation in time)}\\
or & \\
& = \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3}} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{(n_1+N_1 n_2)k_3}_{(N_1 N_2) N_3}}}{} \\
&=
\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} }_{\text{Twiddle}}
\biggl[
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{(n_1+N_1 n_2)k_3}_{(N_1 N_2) N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} \hphantom{.....}\text{(decimation in frequency)}\\
\end{aligned}
$$
- Comparing the equations: all except twiddle factors stay the same
  - DIT: coarser twiddle $W_{N_2 N_3}$ $\rightarrow$ finer twiddle $W_{N_1(N_3 N_2)}$
  - DIF: finer twiddle $W_{(N_1 N_2) N_3}$ $\rightarrow$ coarser twiddle $W_{N_1 N_2}$

Commit message:

note for viewing proper latex equations

fft.md, after:

\* Note: To render LaTeX math equations, view the doc in [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/) + [Markdown All in One](https://github.com/yzhang-gh/vscode-markdown) plugin

# Fourier transform

Discrete Fourier transform:
$$
X(k)=\sum_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)e^{{-j2 \pi nk}\over{N}} \xrightarrow{\tiny{exp(-j2\pi/N)=W_N}}\sum_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)W^{nk}_N
$$

***

## 2-pass decomposition

- With $N=N_1N_2$
  - Fold $n$ into $(n_1,n_2)$ where $n=n_1+N_1n_2$
  - Fold $k$ into $(k_2,k_1)$ where $k=k_2+N_2 k_1$ (dimension reversed/transposed)
- Fourier transform $X(k)=\Sigma_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n)W^{nk}_N$ becomes

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(k_2+N_2 k_1) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}x(n_1 + N_1 n_2)W_{N_1 N_2}^{(n_1+N_1n_2)(k_2+N_2k_1)} \\
&= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} \bcancel{W^{n_2 k_1}_{1}}\underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{..}e^{j 2 \pi N}=1}}{} \\
&= \underbrace{\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{\vphantom{\sum_{n_2}}W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2}}_{\text{Twiddle}}
  \biggl(
    \underbrace{
      \sum_{n_2}x(\dotsb)W^{n_2 k_2
    }_{N_2}}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_2}}
  \biggr)
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_1}}
\end{aligned}
$$

- Algorithm
  1. Perform FFTs along the high dimension $\bold{D_2}$
  2. Pointwise multiply by twiddle factor $W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2}$
  3. Perform FFTs along the low dimension $\bold{D_1}$
  4. Read the resulting data transposed

***

## 3-pass decomposition

- With $N=N_1N_2N_3$
  - Fold $n$ into $(n_1,n_2,n_3)$ where $n=n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3$
  - Fold $k$ into $(k_3,k_2,k_1)$ where $k=k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1$ (dimension reversed/transposed)
- Fourier transform becomes:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3)W_{N_1N_2N_3}^{(n_1+N_1n_2+N_1N_2n_3)(k_3+N_3k_2+N_2 N_3k_1)} \\
&= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_2 N_3)}}}{} \\
%% &= \sum_{n_1} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3} \biggl[ \sum_{n_2} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \biggl( \sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} \biggr) W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} \biggr] W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} \\
&= \underbrace{
\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_3 N_2)} }_{\text{Twiddle(!)}}
\biggl[
\underbrace{
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
  \underbrace{
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} }_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_3}} \vphantom{\Text{()}}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} }_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_2}}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}
}_{\text{FFT along } \bold{D_1}}\\
\end{aligned}
$$
> (!) Note: outermost twiddle factor has it's index **transposed/bit-reversed**

- Recursive tree structure revealed:
  - FFT for $N_1 N_2 N_3$ array requires 2-pass FFT for $N_1$-by-$N_3 N_2$ pseudo matrix
  - FFT for $N_1$-batched $N_3 N_2$ array in turn requires *another 2-pass FFT* for $N_2$-by-$N_3$ pseudo matrix
  - 3 leaf nodes corresponding to FFTs of 3 different radices, 2 parent nodes corresponding to 2 twiddle multiplication

```txt
  N1xN2xN3 .______ N1
            \_____ N2xN3 .____ N2
                          \___ N3
```

***

## Tree decomposition
- Example input: 256-point signal
- Decompose into 4-pass radix-4 FFTs
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_4}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_3 N_4}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_3}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_2 (N_4 N_3)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_2}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_1 (N_4 N_3 N_2)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform radix-4 FFTs along dim $\bold{D_1}$
   - Read the data transposed
```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 4  (N1)
                     \___ 64 (N2xN3xN4) .____ 4  (N2)
                                         \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3)
                                                          \___ 4 (N4)
```
<!-- - For $i$ in $1:4$:
  - Perform radix-4 FFT along ${N_{4-i+1}}$; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{\prod_{j=4-i+1}^{4}{N_j}} \text{ if } i>1$ -->
<!-- Question
- How to make tree traversal deepest child node first? -->

- Alternative Method - Decompose into pseudo-2D 16x16 matrix
   - Perform 2-pass radix-4 FFTs along $\bold{D_{N_3 N_4}}$ pseudo-dimension; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_3 N_4}$
   - Pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{(N_1 N_2)(N_4 N_3)^{(!)}}$
   - Perform 2-pass radix-4 FFTs along $\bold{D_{N_1 N_2}}$ pseudo-dimension; pointwise-multiply twiddle factor $W_{N_1 N_2}$
   - Read the data transposed
```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 16 (N1xN2) .____ 4 (N1)
                    |                 \___ 4 (N2)
                    |
                     \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3)
                                      \___ 4 (N4)
```
> (!) Note: again, indicates that twiddle factor has it's index **transposed/bit-reversed**

***

## Progressive transposition (Stockham algorithm)

- Instead of transposing all dimensions at once in the end, transpose one at a time as we do the butterfly
- Improve performance since reads from LDS are always coalesced (see: Geometric View of Stockham Algorithm)
<!-- - TODO: Example
  - Before: FFT pass 0 -> LDS exchange -> FFT pass 1 -> WB+T
  - Now:    FFT -> WB -> FFT -> WB+T -->

```txt
  256 (N1xN2xN3xN4) .____ 16 (N1xN2) .____ 4 (N1) ____* 16 (N2xN1) ____* 256 (N4xN3xN2xN1)
                    |                 \___ 4 (N2) ___/                 |
                    |                                                  |
                     \___ 16 (N3xN4) .____ 4 (N3) ____* 16 (N4xN3) ___/
                                      \___ 4 (N4) ___/
```

***


## Decimation-in-freqeuncy (DIF) form:
- DIF form is derived by factoring twiddle factor the different way:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(\dotsb) &= \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_2 N_3)}}}{} \\
&= \sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1(N_3 k_2 + k_3)}_{N_1 (N_3 N_2)} }_{\text{Twiddle}}
\biggl[
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1}
\hphantom{.....}\text{(decimation in time)}\\
or & \\
& = \sum_{n_1}\sum_{n_2}\sum_{n_3}x(\dotsb)W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2} W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3} \bcancel{W^{n_2 k_3}_{N_2 N_3}} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} \bcancel{W^{n_1 k_3}_{N_1 N_2 N_3}} \underset{\mathrlap{\hphantom{...} W^{(n_1+N_1 n_2)k_3}_{(N_1 N_2) N_3}}}{} \\
&=
\sum_{n_1} \underbrace{ \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{n_1 k_2}_{N_1 N_2} }_{\text{Twiddle}}
\biggl[
  \sum_{n_2} \underbrace{
    \vphantom{\sum_{n_1}} W^{(n_1+N_1 n_2)k_3}_{(N_1 N_2) N_3} }_{\text{Twiddle} \vphantom{\Text{()}}}
  \biggl(
    \sum_{n_3} x(\dotsb)W^{n_3 k_3}_{N_3}
  \biggr)
W^{n_2 k_2}_{N_2}
\biggr]
W^{n_1 k_1}_{N_1} \hphantom{.....}\text{(decimation in frequency)}\\
\end{aligned}
$$
- Comparing the equations: all except twiddle factors stay the same
  - DIT: coarser twiddle $W_{N_2 N_3}$ $\rightarrow$ finer twiddle $W_{N_1(N_3 N_2)}$
  - DIF: finer twiddle $W_{(N_1 N_2) N_3}$ $\rightarrow$ coarser twiddle $W_{N_1 N_2}$
